DOC-1029 RBAC in Control Plane GA (#206)
redpanda-data/cloud-docs: modules/get-started/pages/cloud-overview.adoc

When you sign up for a Redpanda account, Redpanda creates an organization for you. Your organization contains all your Redpanda resources, including your clusters and networks. Within your organization, Redpanda creates a default resource group to contain your resources. You can rename this resource group, and you can create more resource groups. For example, you may want different resource groups for production and testing. 

For high availability, Redpanda Cloud uses the following control plane - data plane architecture:

image::shared:control_d_plane.png[Control plane and data plane]

> * *Control plane*: This is where most cluster management, operations, and maintenance takes place. The control plane enforces rules in the data plane. You can use xref:security:authorization/rbac/rbac.adoc[role-based access control (RBAC)] in the control plane to manage access to resources (like resource groups, networks, and clusters) in your organization.

Reviewer: Much better flow/org. Thanks!

* *Data plane*: This is where your cluster lives. The term _data plane_ is sometimes used interchangeably with _cluster_. The data plane is where you manage topics, consumer groups, connectors, and schemas. 

* *Agent*: Redpanda uses an agent to manage the data plane from the control plane. 

Clusters are configured and maintained in the control plane, but they remain available even if the network connection to the control plane is lost. 

TIP: In the Redpanda Cloud UI, you see a different side navigation in the control plane and the data plane. You're in the control plane when you first log in. You're at the organization (org) level, and you haven't yet selected a cluster. This is where you can select, create, and delete clusters, networks, and resource groups. You're in the data plane when you're at the cluster level working with topics, consumer groups, connectors, and schemas.

=== BYOC architecture

> In a BYOC architecture, you deploy the data plane in your own VPC. All network connections into the data plane take place through either a public endpoint, or for private clusters, through Redpanda Cloud network connections such as VPC peering, AWS PrivateLink, Azure Private Link, or GCP Private Service Connect. Sensitive data and credentials never leave the data plane. 

Reviewer 2: > Sensitive data and credentials never leave the data plane. 

How about: Customer data never leaves the data plane.

> For high availability, Redpanda Cloud uses a control plane and data plane architecture. 

Reviewer: Shouldn't this be:
For high availability, Redpanda Cloud uses a control plane - data plane architecture.

> * *Control plane*: This is where most cluster management, operations, and maintenance takes place. The control plane enforces rules in the data plane. You can use xref:security:authorization/rbac/rbac.adoc[role-based access control (RBAC)] in the control plane to manage access to resources (like resource groups, networks, and clusters) in your organization.

Reviewer: So interesting that Confluent does not mention control plane or data plane in their docs. Found an instance in their RNs, but nothing in their glossary either.

Reviewer 2: Our architecture is fundamentally different from theirs because of BYOC. We have the distinction due to data sovereignty requirements.

> * *Control plane*: This is where most cluster management, operations, and maintenance takes place. The control plane enforces rules in the data plane. You can use xref:security:authorization/rbac/rbac.adoc[role-based access control (RBAC)] in the control plane to manage access to resources (like resource groups, networks, and clusters) in your organization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Control plane*: Orchestrates cluster management, operations, and maintenance, which is separate from actual data transmission. The control plan enforces rules in the data plane. You can use xref:security:authorization/rbac/rbac.adoc[role-based access control (RBAC)] in the control plane to manage access to resources (like resource groups, networks, and clusters) in your organization.
```

> * *Data plane*: This is where your cluster lives. The term _data plane_ can be used interchangeably with _cluster_. The data plane is where you manage topics, consumer groups, and connectors. 

Reviewer 2: topics, consumer groups, connectors, and schemas.

Author: added in both places: thank you!

> * *Data plane*: This is where your cluster lives. The term _data plane_ can be used interchangeably with _cluster_. The data plane is where you manage topics, consumer groups, connectors, and schemas. 

Reviewer: It's more of a logical construct than physical one, no? Not a place where clusters live, but a organizational construct. 

How about:
Orchestrates data transmission between topics, consumer groups, connectors, and schemas. The term _data plane_ is sometimes used interchangeably with _cluster_ because the data plane is the logical home of your clusters.

> * *Agent*: Redpanda uses an agent to manage the data plane from the control plane. 

Reviewer: Not much detail about the characteristics of an agent. For example, do agents come in contact with customer data? Seems like users might want to know this, no? I don't believe that they can/do, but think maybe it is worth pointing out any other specific characteristics of agents that might help users better understand why we have them in the first place.

Clusters are configured and maintained in the control plane, but they remain available even if the network connection to the control plane is lost. 

> image::shared:control_d_plane.png[Control plane and data plane]

Reviewer: This diagram kind of just appears. Take a sentence to introduce it?

> TIP: In the user interface, when you're at the organization (org) level or the resource group level, but you haven't yet selected a cluster, you're in the control plane. This is where you can select, create, and delete clusters, resource groups, and networks. When you're at the cluster level working with topics, consumer groups, and connectors, you're in the data plane.

Reviewer 2: 🥇

> TIP: In the user interface, when you're at the organization (org) level or the resource group level, but you haven't yet selected a cluster, you're in the control plane. This is where you can select, create, and delete clusters, resource groups, and networks. When you're at the cluster level working with topics, consumer groups, connectors, and schemas, you're in the data plane.

Reviewer: Is this tip for/based on the diagram? If so, maybe take specific elements shown there and use as examples.

Reviewer: After reading this twice, I'm not clear @ whether the diagram is for CP-DP illustration, BYOC architecture, or both. More reason to call it out more explicitly.

Author: Ah, OK. I'll move up the diagram to explain this better. It illustrates Redpanda Cloud architecture.

Author: I also reworded the TIP about the CP-DP in the UI.

=== BYOC architecture

In a BYOC architecture, you deploy the data plane in your own VPC. All network connections into the data plane take place through either a public endpoint, or for private clusters, through Redpanda Cloud network connections such as VPC peering, AWS PrivateLink, Azure Private Link, or GCP Private Service Connect. Sensitive data and credentials never leave the data plane. 

include::get-started:partial$no-access.adoc[]

> A BYOC cluster is initially set up from the control plane. This is a two-step process performed by `rpk cloud byoc apply`:

Reviewer: sure makes it sound like CP is a physical entity...or am I being too literal? If this is good with PM then not a problem.
